Were there any other characters like him?
Not like Dr. Wharton. There were no other
characters like Dr. Wharton. He was something
else. You couldn't help but admire the man.
He was a good- In what way? Because of his memory?
Because of his knowledge? He had the knowledge,
yes. He knew. He was too busy otherwise with his
personal affairs to bother with you. Unless you
ask him a specific question.
He was there with you. What did the administration
think of his personal affairs? They didn't care
for that so much, did they, back in the 1930s? His
first wife died. He made a statement. And that
statement got out to the president. It got back to
him. Quickly. Yeah, real quickly. So Dr. Wharton
came in. What was his statement? Well,
this was her death he talked about. This was
something that he had devoutly wished for. or
something like that. Anyhow, that's what I heard.
He didn't tell me. But anyway, he had his, I think it
was a Form 501 in those days that they issued when
they fired you. When he came in that morning, that
thing was on his desk. It was on a Saturday morning.
as I recall, and I was his graduate assistant that
year. This was in 35, wasn't it? So I
didn't see him for a while. And finally, Dr.
Marsdell got a hold of me, said, we don't have any
grades for those seniors. And the grades are
supposed to be in today. Will you try to find Dr.
Wharton, get him to grade those papers? turn in
those grades before 5 o'clock. So these seniors
can, these students can, well, it wasn't
graduation anyway. They had to have the grades in
by 5. That was the deadline anyway. I found Dr.
Wharton. He was in the old baron's tavern in Bryan
drinking beer. So he said, John, I am no longer on
the faculty at A&M, and if Dr. Marsteller wants
those papers graded, he can grade them himself. I
said, I don't care what he does with them. Well, I
told Dr. Marsteller, Dr. Wharton is not going to
grade the papers. He said, well, you get up there
and grade those papers and turn in the grade for
them. Well, I went up to the lab, and his office was
in the laboratory. in one corner of the lab. So I
graded the papers and got their grades in. I graded
them as best I could. Old Dr. Wharton told me that
morning, he said, John, if you ever go to work for
Texas A&M, I'm going to cut your GD throat. Really?
Ruth heard it. She was sitting in the car. The old
brother. What happened to them and them? Hm? What
happened to Wharton and them? He went to San
Antonio and became chief of meat inspection for
the city of San Antonio. And then he had eight wives
after that? Well, he had gone through the second
wife here. I thought you said the first one died.
Well, his first one died. And that's when he got
fired for making this statement? Well, he had
married to another one before this first one died.
Oh, really? See, they were divorced. Well, he and
the second one
didn't get along any better than he and the first
one. So I was in lab one morning, and this second
wife came in. She had on a great big picture hat, you
know, one of those wide-brimmed things. She had it
pulled down over one of her eyes, and she was
looking for Dr. Horton. Dr. Wharton, not here. She
said, well, I am going to have to leave him. I cannot
live with him. Well, by that time, she had raised
that hat up enough I could see that big black eye.
Oh, really? I found out then that she had been down
at old Ed Hardlick's. That was Uncle Ed's place.
You've heard about that. I think it's... It's Fish
Richards now down in there. That's where the
students always hung out and drank their beers on.
Well, anyway, the night before, Dr. Wharton had
been to a meeting of the junior chapter of the
American Binaural Medical Association. He was
sponsor. It was in the old amphitheater at Francis
Hall. Someone came in and said something to him.
Doc just stayed in the group until the meeting was
over, and then he left. He stopped by Ed
Hardlicker's. When he went in, his wife was
sitting at a table. And he just walked right on by
her and down to the bar, got a beer. Well, before he
finished that bottle of beer, Someone came and
tapped him on the shoulder and said, Doc, your wife
just fell out of the chair. She's on the floor back
there, drunk.
So Doc said, well, pick her up. You saw her first.
Well, this old boy went back, picked her up, and
took her out and put her in Doc's car in the front
seat. Doc went ahead and finished his beer. I don't
know whether he had another one or two or what. But
anyway, when he went out, she was lying there in the
front seat, you know, head back on the back of the
seat. She was out. But when Doc got in the car, his
wife awakened. Well, she knew that he kept a pistol
in the pocket, in the car pocket, on the dash
pocket. So she tried to get it. And when she tried
it, he hit her in her eye. That's when he hit her in
that left eye. Knocked her loose from it. And
that's where the big black eye came from. So
anyhow, he was canned. He was fired. As his
assistant, were you sorry to see him go? Well, yes,
I liked old Doc. He and I got along all right. I
didn't take anything off of him. I didn't give him
anything to take either. Because I was just a
graduate assistant, and I did what I was told. And
did the best I could with the students. I tried to
give them something when they came to class.
But that's the reason. I had no pathology. to
amount to anything. That's the reason that Ruth
and I went to Ann Arbor to University of Michigan
Medical School and we took every course they had,
graduate and undergraduate, in pathology. So I
figured that I would go on teaching pathology.
And I could tell you that we had nothing, we had no
material for microscopic work whatsoever all
that had been thrown out so i began in in the from
1936 to 1941
when i went into anatomy i had prepared over 400
class sets of various diseases i
had no technician i had to do all that i was the only
one in pathology I did all of the post-mortem work
for the College of Veterinary Medicine. I
preserved all the gross specimens. I made I don't
know how many museum jars that we fixed up on, so
Ruth would go out with me, that we would fix up on
Sundays, prepare these specimens for class work.
And sectioning tissue. Well, you gave all the
lectures. You graded all the papers. You did all
the, you were the only one. And one semester in
there, the pathology department was combined
with bacteriology. It was pathology and
bacteriology. Then it placed under Dr. Dunn, who
later became dean. There was one semester, Dr.
Dunn was sick. He was out the entire semester. This
was about 38, 39, 38, 39, somewhere in there. Well,
we got old Dr. Van Valkenburg to come down and
handle the immunology. And I had all of the path and
all of the bacteriology. Well, now, if you can
imagine, I section tissue, prepare material for
classwork and pathology, laboratory work and
pathology. I am doing all the post-mortem work. I
have to keep, I don't know how many different
cultures of bacteria we had, but you have to
transfer and keep everything going. You have to
make up all the special medias and so on for
detection of carbohydrates and so on, gas
fermentation and what have you, blood media and
what have you. You have to do all that yourself.
That was one semester. Dr. Dunn, I didn't see him
from the beginning of the semester to the last of
the semester. I was handling everything in
bacteriology and pathology. except immunology.
Dr. Van Valkenburg took it.
I got a thank you.
And that was $1,800 on a nine-month basis. And
people bellyache now about having to work so much.
I have one last question about Dr. Wharton. It
appears that to you, is it true that he was then
fired because of his private life? Well, I think
more private life than anything else. Not because
of his professional life? No, I don't think so.
What did the staff, what did your colleagues and
yourself think about the fact that he was fired
because of his private life and not because of his
professional life? I don't know what they thought
about him. I really don't. They probably had the
same feeling that I had, that he deserved it. I
wouldn't have wanted him on the staff the way
things were. In fact, it may have been a repeat
later on. I don't know. I'm not going to send
anybody. But anyway. What do you mean a repeat? No,
I had to fire a person. Oh, yeah? In fact, I fired
two.
In the 50s? No, no. This was way later in anatomy.
Well, there was one. I inherited one when I went in
the department.
He admitted that he was a misfit.
He would like to have gone on in human medicine, and
it was an embarrassment to him that he was in
veterinary medicine. I said, well, if that's the
way you feel about it, then you don't deserve to be
in here with veterinary students. If you don't
think that veterinary medicine is the only
profession in the world, you don't deserve to be in
here teaching. I don't want you. And so
I went on over to Dr. Marsteller's office and told
him to fill out a form 501 for him. Well, this old boy
went to Dr. Marsteller that same morning, well,
within the hour. And Dr. Marsteller said, unless
you can patch it up with Dr. Melliff, why, I'm going
to have to let you go. Because he's already been by
here. I'll fill out this form to fire you.
This fella came up and talked to me. I said, well,
I'll try you the remainder of the semester. And
unless you change your mind about veterinary
medicine by September, you better be in another
position somewhere else. I'll give you this
summer. to look around. You'll be on salary this
summer, but you can look around and find you
another place. Well, that summer, he decided he'd
go on back to medical. He'd go to medical school,
and he did. He went to St. Louis University School
of Medicine. What he did, he stayed two years and
quit, and still he's practicing veterinary
medicine to this day. He is. Yeah. He doesn't like
human medicine either. He thought that was it.
What about the other one, the other person? Well,
the other one is still living. And I hope he's doing
well. But he just had too many
things to do with the opposite sex. And he was
married and a family and so on. So we had a trial. and
this led to the establishment of dismissal
procedures following the aup's recommendations
i'm sure about when was this this was in the late 60s
it took three years to set it up but we had a trial
with jury lawyers and everything he had lawyers
and the nm had lawyers but i hope that now with their
committee on grievances or whatever it is There is
a faculty committed to look into a dismissal of a
person. And it has to be on firm ground. You can't
just fire a man because you don't like him. That's
the way it was before this was set up. And I guess
it's a good thing that it was set up. But in those
days, before we ever had it, I didn't know any
mistreatment of an individual if he did his work.
I don't think Wharton would have ever been fired if
he hadn't just,
well, it was too glaring. It was too obvious of what
he was doing. He made no big secret of it. But he
never did bring anything on the campus.
All of his dirty work, I would say, was done off the
campus. But
his name attached to A&M wasn't good for A&M. That
was it. In the war and until 1969, you were head of
the Department of Vet and Anatomy. Yeah. It was the
same thing when I went into Veterinary Anatomy. We
had nothing. Okay, I'd like to talk about those
changes. So, Dr. Mundink was head of the
department, left, went with Latterly
Laboratories. Dr. Rubin had come here two years
before with Dr. Mundink. So, Rubin and I were,
well, Dr. Lange, L-A-N-G-E, called it Lange. Dr.
Lange was here then too, Dr. Longy and Dr. Rubin.
And Dr. Longy had the idea, so he told me that he
should have been made head of department instead
of me.
In fact, they look around and they get this younger
person. So he told me that this younger person,
this snip, to take the headship when he had been in
the department for two years. He actually should
have been made head of department. Well, that was
the beginning. Actually, I was older than Lang, as
I call him, Lang, instead of Longy. I was older than
he was, but he didn't know it. And I had had more
education than Dr. Lang. In fact, I had two more
degrees at that time than Dr. Lang had. So, well,
he's the one who I had to let go. And our differences
began right about that time. When I went into the
department, he was so unhappy because he wasn't
made head of department. And that's what he told
me. So I called him one day down. I called up one day
down there. I don't know. I had a question,
something I wanted to ask you if it was. down there,
or had I overlooked it in Francis Hall. We had the
little two-story building, which is in civil
engineering now. It was the anatomy lab. He was
down there, and I was up on the hill, as we called it,
at Francis Hall. No, he didn't know where it was,
and so on, and so on. He gave me a piece of his mind
then. for calling him up. He was in class, didn't
want to be disturbed. I said, where are you? So
that's when I went down to see him. I said, you just
stay right there till I get there, because we're
going to have some words.
I went down there, and he was in class. He kept on
lecturing. I just stood in the door, watched him a
while. He didn't even look my way. He knew I was
there. That's when I went on over to Dr. Marsteller
and told him to fill out the 501 for him. I wasn't
going to put up with him. But he came and talked to
me, as I said. And we patched it up. He stayed on
until the end of the summer. Then went back to
medical school. Went to medical school. There
must have been a great change in curriculum while
you were department head. Well, we added courses.
I think the big change was in the improvement of
teaching. OK. Let's talk about that. Why did it
improve? Well, it improved because
we were endeavoring to build up a department. from
nothing. And we had it. There was no way to go but up.
And unless you went up, you might as well quit. It
was just that bad. So we began improving our
teaching methods. We began to get materials that
would allow us to present our subject to the
students in a much better way. Projectors and such
as that and microscopes. Lord, we needed
everything. And laboratory tables and chairs and
you name it, we needed it. Because we didn't have
anything. We were down to what we could rake and
scrape out of a basement. And that was about it.
Microscopes, the big thing at first, we had no
trouble getting animals for gross dissection. In
fact, I don't believe we ever had any trouble. Dr.
Francis didn't seem to have trouble getting live
material for gross dissection. embalming,
preparation specimen, wet specimen material. He
had no trouble. But it was in the microscopic part.
Embryology, we had nothing. And we had to order
most of our embryology material because it was an
impossibility for me, as head of department and
technician too, to make histology material and
embryology material, too, because making
embryology slide serial sections is much harder
work than just cutting sections for histology,
where you just put one section on the slide. If you
have to have a 24-hour chick serial sections all on
one slide, that's much more difficult.
We ordered most of the embryology material. We
bought a 600 egg incubator. We would start out
hatching with eggs and break eggs every day and
watch the development. This was for embryology.
And then when the chicks hatched out, we usually
have several hundred chicks. We would sex them. I
learned to sex chicks, baby chicks, one day old. We
had lots of fun that way. And then usually, just as
an aside, we would separate the cocks from the
hens, from the pullets. And one boy would take all
the cocks, and another one would take the hens, and
we'd raise them all up to frying size and check, see
how good we were in sexing. See how many hens we had
over there with the roosters. Well, when they got
up to be frying sides, we always had a big barbecue.
The class was out here, out that old patio out
there. Really? Right out there? Yeah, right out
there. And so they usually bring a keg of beer. I
wouldn't have anything to do with it, but they'd
have a keg of beer out there somewhere. We'd have a
big chicken barbecue. Great. Big deal, yeah. Lots
of fun. Of course, these were older students. But
it paid off. But I don't know. Altogether, in
histology in those years, when I had no
technician, I don't know how many class sets I
prepared.
In pathology, I had over 400 sets when I left there.
And I don't suppose there's a veterinary college
in this country that could equal our collection in
histology and embryology and neuroanatomy now.
And I did most of the sectioning. I had help from
1955 on. But the help that I got had to be taught. And
so there was a period of years when actually,
I was still doing most of the technical help
because I was teaching the person I had hired. You
couldn't hire anybody else. You didn't have money
enough to hire a graduate technician. So as a
consequence, we found a person who was willing to
work, a good worker. She was working over there at
Black's Pharmacy on Old Jones Pharmacy now, or
whatever. I taught her, and she got to be, I guess,
she was about the best tissue technician on the
campus. She's retired now from A&M, but she was
with me from then on until I retired in 71. A good
technician, and I don't have any others she
taught. For years, you were chairman of the
Student Selections Committee. Yes. That was one
of your important committee jobs. Could you
describe this election process? And did it change
over the years? I couldn't tell you whether it has
changed very much or not now because I haven't kept
up with it. But in those days, we tried to evaluate
the student as best we could. We looked at
everything that we had on that student. His
transcript was the big thing, what he had done in
his college work. This was in the 1940s and 1950s?
Well, this was in the 50s. Back in the 40s, Dr. Dunn
was chairman of the committee. And he had a way of
evaluating, too. They had a sort of a score method,
so many points if he had a year on the farm, and so
many points if he belonged to the 4-H group, and so
on and so on. And so you totaled up your score to
evaluate the students. But we went more on the
transcript, on his college record, what he had to
show us. There's so much that can be learned from a
transcript, but just besides grades.
whether the student stayed with what he started
out. In my own instance, I began with EE, and I
changed to biology, and then I changed to
veterinary medicine. Well, I don't know whether I
would have thought very much of that in evaluating
me or not. Because I just hadn't made up my mind. I
was a little bit too changeable. And I dropped some
courses and so on. Well, that didn't speak well for
a student in his evaluation. If he started out in
veterinary medicine, then he had his mind made up.
If he started out in pre-vet, he had his mind made up
back yonder that veterinary medicine was
actually what he wanted. You had to find out
something about motivation, whether he really
wanted it and how long he had wanted it and so on. How
did you find out about that? Didn't you have
interviews? Oh, yes. You had interviews. What
were the important questions during the
interviews? The important questions on his
coursework and on his life up to the time. And, of
course, we had letters from various persons,
letters of recommendation. But those things
couldn't always
be taken. face value. Perhaps you know yourself,
if you've ever written a letter of
recommendation, you've tried to avoid saying
anything that might be derogatory. Well, another
thing about our selection from the time that Al
Price became dean, we had to have everything so
that whatever we decided about a student would
stand up in court. Absolutely. You didn't just...
When was this? When did this come about? Well, this
was from the time that Al Price became dean only.
Why? Why did they change the policy?
You can be hailed into court now any student can
take you into court anytime he wants to the way
things are going now you see that every day
lawsuits so unless you have it in black and white
You just better not draw it off the top of your head.
And just because you think something is so, you
better know it for sure. So the graves were the big
things that you had to go on. This was all in black
and white. This is a record. And it's a record that
you can take into court.
Do you remember any law cases against the
Selections Committee? No, I don't recall any. I
think we've been threatened. But I know I never had
to appear. You know, during the, over the years,
from the mid-30s to the mid-60s, the requirements
and the number of...